Blog: pgroll talk recap (PGConf EU 2024) (#332)
xataio/mdx-blog: schema-changes-expand-contract-method.mdx

---
title: 'Schema changes and the power of expand-contract with pgroll'
description: 'A pgconf EU talk recap covering how the expand-contract pattern and pgroll enable zero-downtime schema changes and rollbacks.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgconf-eu-pgroll-talk-recap@2x.png
  alt: pgroll

> author: Cezzaine Zaher

Author: ```suggestion
author: Andrew Farries
```

> authorEmail: cezzaine@xata.io

Author: ```suggestion
authorEmail: andrew@xata.io
```

date: 11-13-2024
tags: ['open-source', 'postgres', 'schema', 'migrations', 'pgroll', 'fpSchemaMigrations', 'oss']
published: true
slug: pgroll-expand-contract
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgconf-eu-pgroll-talk-recap-og@2x.png
---

Schema changes have a reputation. They’re the kind of task that strikes fear into even the most seasoned developers. Downtime, breaking changes, and complex rollbacks can turn an otherwise smooth deployment into a high-stakes game of database roulette.

> But Xata Staff Software Engineer, Andrew Farries, has a better way. In his recent talk at PostgreSQL Conference Europe, he dives into PostgreSQL schema migrations using the expand-contract pattern, a strategy designed for zero-downtime, reversible schema changes. Xata built [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), a tool that automates this process while taking care of the tricky parts—like data backfills and versioned schemas.

Author: ```suggestion
But Xata Staff Software Engineer, Andrew Farries, has a better way. In his recent talk at PostgreSQL Conference Europe, he dives into **PostgreSQL schema migrations** using the **expand-contract pattern**, a strategy designed for **zero-downtime, reversible schema changes**. Xata built [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), a tool that automates this process while taking care of the tricky parts—like data backfills and versioned schemas.
```

> But Xata Staff Software Engineer, Andrew Farries, has a better way. In his recent talk at PostgreSQL Conference Europe, he dives into **PostgreSQL schema migrations** using the **expand-contract pattern**, a strategy designed for **zero-downtime, reversible schema changes**. Xata built [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), a tool that automates this process while taking care of the tricky parts—like data backfills and versioned schemas.

Author: ```suggestion
But there is a better way. In my recent talk at PostgreSQL Conference Europe, I dive into **PostgreSQL schema migrations** using the **expand-contract pattern**, a strategy designed for **zero-downtime, reversible schema changes**. Xata built [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), a tool that automates this process while taking care of the tricky parts—like data backfills and versioned schemas.
```

> This blog recaps the highlights of Andrew’s talk which is [now available to watch](https://youtu.be/Wbg2HoYjLHU?si=j27BPwS4LWzxTQIA).

Author: ```suggestion
This blog recaps the highlights of my talk which is [now available to watch](https://youtu.be/Wbg2HoYjLHU?si=j27BPwS4LWzxTQIA).
```

## Why are schema changes so hard?

It boils down to three big challenges:

> - _Schema volatility:_ Your schema evolves constantly as your application changes. It’s never "done."

Author: ```suggestion
- **Schema volatility:** Your schema evolves constantly as your application changes. It’s never "done."
```

> - _Direct dependencies:_ Most applications talk directly to the schema, leaving no room for abstraction.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Direct dependencies:** Most applications talk directly to the schema, leaving no room for abstraction.
```

> - _Risk:_ Databases are at the core of your stack, making any changes potentially catastrophic.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Risk:** Databases are at the core of your stack, making any changes potentially catastrophic.
```

What does that mean in practice? Painful patterns like:

> - _Additive-only changes:_ Adding fields to avoid breaking anything, but never cleaning up, leading to bloated, messy schemas.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Additive-only changes:** Adding fields to avoid breaking anything, but never cleaning up, leading to bloated, messy schemas.
```

> - _Locking nightmares:_ Schema changes can block reads and writes, causing unexpected downtime.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Locking nightmares:** Schema changes can block reads and writes, causing unexpected downtime.
```

> - _Environment mismatches:_ Migrations that work fine in dev/staging but crash in prod.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Environment mismatches:** Migrations that work fine in dev/staging but crash in prod.
```

> - _Rollback woes:_ Some changes are hard to undo, making forward-only fixes the default (and dangerous) approach.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Rollback woes:** Some changes are hard to undo, making forward-only fixes the default (and dangerous) approach.
```

## Enter expand-contract: The pattern that changes everything

The expand-contract pattern tackles these challenges by splitting schema changes into two phases:

> 1. Expand: Add new schema elements alongside the existing ones.

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Expand:** Add new schema elements alongside the existing ones.
```

> 2. Contract: Once all dependencies are updated, remove the old elements.

Author: ```suggestion
2. **Contract:** Once all dependencies are updated, remove the old elements.
```

This approach avoids downtime and allows old and new versions of your application to coexist while the migration is underway.

### An example: upgrading an orders table

Imagine a table with a simple `shipped` boolean column. Now you want a more flexible `status` enum to track states like `pending`, `shipped`, and `delivered`.

A naive approach would involve a big bang migration:

1. Stop the app.
2. Add the new column.
3. Backfill data.
4. Deploy the updated app.

This works but means downtime—and we all know how users love downtime, not to mention how costly this can be to your business.

With expand-contract:

> 1. Expand: Add the `status` column and dual-write to both `shipped` and `status`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Expand:** Add the `status` column and dual-write to both `shipped` and `status`.
```

> 2. Backfill: Migrate data from `shipped` to `status`.

Author: ```suggestion
2. **Backfill:** Migrate data from `shipped` to `status`.
```

> 3. Contract: Update the app to use `status` exclusively, then drop `shipped`.

Author: ```suggestion
3. **Contract:** Update the app to use `status` exclusively, then drop `shipped`.
```

### Lessons learned

From building pgroll, Xata discovered some key insights about modern schema migrations:

1. **Expand-contract is powerful but tricky:** Tools like pgroll make it practical for teams of all sizes.
2. **High-level abstractions matter:** Migration tools should operate above raw SQL, enabling finer control over lock durations and sequencing.
3. **Data migrations should live in the database layer:** Keeping dual writes out of application code makes migrations safer and more maintainable.

### The future of pgroll

Currently at [version 0.7.0](https://xata.io/blog/pgroll-0-7-0-update), pgroll is already in production use at Xata, but the team is focused on scaling it further. Plans for version 1.0 include:

- Better performance benchmarks for large datasets.
- Improved support for multi-terabyte databases.
- More tools for testing migrations safely in staging environments.

## Ready to learn more?

> Watch the full video of Andrew’s talk to see pgroll in action

Author: ```suggestion
Watch the full video of my talk to see pgroll in action
```
